---
description: |
  Create a new Fresh project by running the Fresh project creation tool. This
  scaffolds out the various files and folders a Fresh project needs.
---

> [info]: The documentation assumes you have Deno 1.35.0 or later installed.

To install Deno, follow the installation instructions in the Deno manual.

For the best user experience, you should also set up your editor or IDE to play
nice with Deno. Documentation for this can also be found in the manual.

To create a new project, run:

```sh Terminal
deno run -A -r https://fresh.deno.dev
```

This will scaffold out the new project with the following folder structure:

```txt Project structure
â”œâ”€â”€ islands/      # Interactive component folder
|   â””â”€â”€ ...
â”œâ”€â”€ routes/       # Route files that map to URLs
|   â””â”€â”€ ...
â”œâ”€â”€ dev.ts        # starts Fresh in development mode
â”œâ”€â”€ main.ts       # starts Fresh in production mode
â”œâ”€â”€ fresh.gen.ts  # autogenerated meta file
â””â”€â”€ deno.json     # Deno's configuration file
```

The next step after scaffolding out a new project, is to actually start it. To
do this you can run `deno task start`. Environment variables will be
automatically read from `.env`.

```sh Terminal
$ deno task start
Watcher Process started.
 ðŸ‹ Fresh ready
     Local: http://localhost:8000
```

Go to the URL printed in the terminal to see your running project. Try change
some of the text in `routes/index.tsx` and see how the page updates
automatically when you save the file.

> [info]: Fresh needs a couple of permissions to run
>
> - `--allow-net`: Required to start the HTTP server
> - `--allow-read`: Required to read (static) files from disk
> - `--allow-env`: Required to read environment variables that can be used to
  > configure your project

### Configuring Deno

A `deno.json` file is also created in the project directory that is used to
configure Deno. It contains an `"imports"` field which is an
[import map][import-map] that is used to manage the dependencies of your
project. The other field to note is `"tasks"` which can be used as shortcuts for
longer commands or common tasks for your project.

```json Example deno.json
{
  "lock": false,
  "tasks": {
    "start": "deno run -A --watch=static/,routes/ dev.ts",
    "build": "deno run -A dev.ts build",
    "preview": "deno run -A main.ts"
  },
  "imports": {
    "$fresh/": "../",
    "preact": "https://esm.sh/preact@10.15.1",
    "preact/": "https://esm.sh/preact@10.15.1/",
    "preact-render-to-string": "https://esm.sh/*preact-render-to-string@6.2.1",
    "@preact/signals": "https://esm.sh/*@preact/signals@1.1.3",
    "@preact/signals-core": "https://esm.sh/@preact/signals-core@1.2.3"
  },
  "compilerOptions": {
    "jsx": "react-jsx",
    "jsxImportSource": "preact"
  }
}
```

Two important folders are also created that contain your routes and islands
respectively:

- **`routes/`**: This folder contains all of the routes in your project. The
  names of each file in this folder correspond to the path where that page will
  be accessed. Code inside of this folder is never directly shipped to the
  client. You'll learn more about how routes work in the next section.
- **`islands/`**: This folder contains all of the interactive islands in your
  project. The name of each file corresponds to the name of the island defined
  in that file. Code inside of this folder can be run from both client and
  server. You'll learn more about islands later in this chapter.

Finally a **`static/`** folder is created that contains static files that are
automatically served "as is". [Learn more about static files][static-files].

[import-map]: https://deno.land/manual/linking_to_external_code/import_maps
[task-runner]: https://deno.land/manual/tools/task_runner
[static-files]: ../concepts/static-files
